LeBron James was present at two Game 7 thrillers in 2016 but played in only one of them.

It was on the night of June 19 at Oracle Arena in Oakland, Calif., where James and the Cleveland Cavaliers faced the Golden State Warriors in Game 7 of the N.B.A. Finals.

Before bringing the trophy home to Ohio — as promised — James and his teammates had to find a way to win on the road, just as they had in the first three rounds of the playoffs.

History was against them. No team had rallied from a 1-3 deficit in the Finals to win the N.B.A. title. And the Cavaliers, founded in 1970, had never won the title, not even when James — the greatest basketball talent of his generation — first led them to the Finals against the San Antonio Spurs in 2007, when he could jump a little higher, recover a little faster and dominate with more margin for error.

But this time James, at 31, was part star, part missionary, and what elevated this into the game of the year from an international perspective was James’s drawing power and his throwback sense of community.

Continue reading the main story
There was a glut of transcendent games in 2016: Portugal’s first major title at the Euro, secured in extra time in France; Brazil’s cathartic grudge match in Rio with Germany that secured its first men’s soccer gold medal; the Cubs’ curse-terminating victory in the Game 7 that James would attend as a spectator just four and a half months after the N.B.A. finals while wearing a T-shirt that read “Cleveland or Nowhere.”

But in a thoroughly mercantile, increasingly globalized sports world, players are still the sum of their actions, and James — who returned from Miami to Cleveland in 2014 — was not only honoring his roots with his old-school loyalty and hunger-pang hustle, he was honoring others’ roots, too.

“Look, the city of Cleveland needed this,” said Tony Godsick, the Cleveland-based agent who has long represented Roger Federer. “It’s been the butt of so many jokes for so long, all unnecessary to be honest. A lot of the things people make fun of were years ago. But LeBron was able — and he was not alone with that great supporting cast — to find a way to change the direction of the series and probably a lot more.

“Harvard Business School can do a study in a few years and really delve into the economic and psychological impact of that win, what it did to a city and a region.”

The Cavs’ Game 7 was a fine spectacle even without the backstory — 20 lead changes in total; players succumbing or rising to the big occasion.